---
layout: post
title: Formative Feedback in Intro CS
excerpt: >-
  Deploying in-class paper quizzes: from 40 to 400 to 1,400.
---

*This essay was selected for the 2019 UC Berkeley Teaching Effectiveness Award.
An edited copy is slated to appear on the GSI Teaching & Resource Center.
Below is the author's version.*

Students learn computer science (CS) by doing. In CS 61A, a highly-rated
introductory CS course at UC Berkeley, students are introduced to new concepts
in lecture, go hands-on to learn the solution process in lab and discussion
with guidance from teaching assistants, and synthesize multiple ideas on their
own or with a partner in coding homeworks and projects. Throughout these
activities, students experience aspects of CS such as programming, debugging,
program tracing, and analysis while building a sense of community and belonging
through small-classroom environments supported by numerous course tutors.
However, these activities do not explicitly prepare students for taking
high-stakes paper exams which have been identified as a significant source of
stress in the course. Furthermore, to improve the efficiency of their learning,
students receive assistance from instructors in real-time in lab, discussion,
and homework. While receiving real-time assistance significantly reduces
frustration, it can also shortcut learning when too much help is given causing
students to struggle with exams as they become reliant upon the guidance.

I believe CS 61A can maintain its current goal of minimizing student
frustration with real-time feedback while also supporting comprehensive student
learning by highlighting misconceptions through targeted, formative feedback.
In Fall 2016, as a means of providing such formative feedback, I introduced
10-minute paper quizzes in my 40-student discussion sections. Quizzes serve as
a check on student understanding after synthesizing and applying ideas in
homework but before taking a high-stakes exam. Quiz questions are designed to
model what students can expect to see on the exam and highlight key ideas from
the previous week's discussion section. Inspired by the active learning
literature, students first take the full 10 minutes to complete their quiz
individually and commit to an answer, then break out into small groups to
discuss their solution process, before regrouping as a class to summarize their
ideas. This sparks lively discussion as students are forced to confront their
misconceptions and reflect on their solution process.

After some polishing, my quizzes were deployed to 400 students in CS 61A Summer
2017\. While student feedback reported the group discussions as generally
helpful, not all discussions were equally effective. From classroom
observations, students would often miss small but crucial details. Furthermore,
data collected from the course dashboard suggested that students tended not to
revisit past assignments. In order to encourage students to review their
quizzes, I used Gradescope, an online grading platform, to scan, grade, and
share individual quiz feedback with students the same day they took the quiz.
Quizzes were graded on completion, not correctness, to encourage students to
focus on improvement rather than points. Our exam questions often test multiple
concepts and skills, so within each rubric item I explicitly described the
embedded learning goals, potential misconceptions, and problem-solving
strategies. Students were encouraged to use the rubric to guide their learning
and clarify questions from discussion.

Iterating on student and course staff feedback from the summer, I deployed
quizzes to 1,400 students in CS 61A Fall 2017. While the detailed rubrics
helped students identify areas for improvement, there was no guidance to point
students to relevant resources and additional practice problems for students to
check their understanding. To support these needs, I developed an online study
guide accompanying each quiz. Each study guide included a summary of the quiz's
key ideas, problem-solving strategies, and resources for further review, as
well as 3--6 problems of increasing difficulty for students to check their
understanding. End-of-semester student evaluations suggested that this
quiz-study guide system was well-received by students, and an effective use of
time in discussion section.
